---
title: "The Industrial Revolution and the Computer Revolution"
published: false
---

I thought of an interesting parallel between the industrial revolution and the computer revolution.

The industrial revolution was characterised by two major changes in the means of production. First, production of goods was broken down into simple components - such as Adam Smith's [famous example](https://www.econlib.org/library/Smith/smWN.html?chapter_num=4#book-reader) of pin-making being divided into eighteen distinct operations, each carried out by different workers - and second, advances in "machining" allowed production tasks which previously had to be done by craftsmen to be automatically carried out by machines. It's easy to see how the first change would facilitate the second change; machines are good at doing simple, routine tasks. So breaking down a complex production task into simple components is a necessary precondition for getting machines to do it.

Since the 17th Century, the word "computer" has been used to refer to people who would perform numerical calculations for various scientific projects. From quickly reading the [wikipedia article](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer_(job_description), it looks like the first computers were somewhat elite: during the renaissance, computers were something like assistants to astronomers who would predict the trajectories of planets. During the 18th and 19th Century mathematical tables (logs, sines, etc) were compiled in Europe by sending out bits of the calculations to long-distance computer workers. A major dam in the Netherlands was built in the 1920s with the fluid dynamics figured out by computers under Hendrik Lorentz solving the differential equations. When I read this, I assumed that this was Lorenz the mathematician/meteorologist, of chaos theory fame, but it's actually Lorentz the physicist of Lorentz transformation fame. But the importance of computers really amped up during the world wars. During WWI computers were used to calculate ballistic tables. In the Manhattan project computers were employed to help understand nuclear fission. Computers were often women around this time. Computing was considered menial and low-status, but was still intellectual happening close to the centre of scientific innovation. It was therefore the perfect halfway house for smart women who hadn't yet managed to break into mainstream science.

Incidentally, it was also during WWII that the *electronic* computer was invented. 
